# Anmerkungen zum Seminar am 13.04.2021

## Zum Kursangebot (in German)

Das Kursangebot im Master Informatik besteht aus
* der Vorlesung “Modelling Sustainable Systems and Semantic Web”, synchron
  online, do 11-13 Uhr
* einem Seminar “Complex Systems and Co-Operative Action”, synchron online, di
  9-11 Uhr,
* dem Online-Praktikum zur TRIZ-Methodik.

Folien und Handouts zu Vorlesung und Seminar sind in englischer Sprache, da
international Interesse an der Verfolgung unserer Debatten geäußert wurde.  Im
Gegensatz zu einer ersten Planung werden aber die Vorlesung und auch die
meisten Seminardiskussionen in deutsch stattfinden. Ausnahmen imSeminar sind
möglch.

__Alle drei Bestandteile__ können als __10 LP Vertiefungsmodul__ 10-202-2309
"Semantic Web" angerechnet werden. Prüfungsvorleistung sind ein Vortrag im
Seminar sowie das erfolgreich absolvierte TRIZ-Praktikum, Prüfungsleistung
eine mündliche Prüfung.

__Vorlesung und Seminar__ können auch als __5 LP Seminarmodul__ 10-202-2312
"Angewandte Informatik" angerechnet werden. Prüfungsvorleistung ist ein Vortrag
im Seminar. Als Prüfungsleistung ist bis zum Ende des Semesters (30.09.2021)
eine Seminararbeit anzufertigen.

__Das Praktikum allein__ kann als __5 LP Modul__ 10-202-2012 "Aktuelle Trends
der Informatik" im Master Informatik angerechnet werden. Prüfungsvorleistung
ist das erfolgreich absolvierte TRIZ-Praktikum, Prüfungsleistung eine
mündliche Prüfung.

Bitte schreiben Sie sich im OPAL zügig in die entsprechende Gruppe ein, damit
der Kurs entsprechend genauer geplant werden kann.

Bitte beachten Sie dass __der Zugang zum TRIZ-Trainer kostenpflichtig ist__.
Dies betrifft Studierende, die das Vertiefungsmodul oder das Praktikumsmodul
belegen.  Detail werden mündlich erläutert.

Da die Veranstaltungen alle online stattfinden, haben wir einzelne
Bestandteile oder auch den ganzen Kurs __für externe Teilnehmer__ geöffnet.
Die alleinige Teilnahme an Vorlesung und Seminar ist kostenfrei, es wird auch
keine Seminarleistung erwartet, das TRIZ-Praktikum ist kostenpflichtig.

## Plan of the course (in English)

See also [the Slides](Slides.pdf).

### Modelling Sustainable Systems and Semantic Web

The Semantic Web extends the Web in order to make data easier to exchange
between computers and make it easier to use; for example, the term "Bremen" in
a web document can be supplemented with information as to whether it refers to
a ship with that name, a family name or the town "Bremen".  This additional
information makes information explicit in otherwise unstructured data.  To add
such information in a formalised way Semantic Web standards for the
publication and use of machine-readable data (especially RDF) are applied.
([More about Semantic Web](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_Web))

This is a _very technical_ view that does not take into account, _why_ these
distinctions are relevant at all.  In this more general sense __Semantic Web
Technologies are concerned with the sharpening of the meaning of concepts in
particular contexts__.

These challenges are part of another core informatics competence &ndash; the
ability to elicit corresponding requirement complexes within the framework of
_Requirements Engineering_, to structure and finally to model them.

The focus of the _lecture_ is on the connection of these two complexes of
competences, whereby it is assumed that students in computer science already
have a basic knowledge of both areas.  A special focus is on the _resolution
of contradictory requirement situations_ as the core of systematic innovation
methodologies such as TRIZ.

The lecture is based on the concept of a "Flipped Classroom", which assumes,
that you studied __beforehand__ the material mentioned for the current
lecture. In the lecture only the main concepts and relationships will be
presented in a cursory manner.  On the other hand, time will be spent for
questions and discussions of controversial or incomprehensible concepts.

### Research Seminar

Systematic innovation methodologies such as TRIZ are essentially based on a
better understanding of the development dynamics of corresponding (technical
and non-technical) systems.  The results are rooted in engineering experience
from structured processes of planning, implementation and operation of
technical systems. Increasingly, cooperative interdisciplinary collaboration
matters rather than the one brilliant mind that commands thousand hands. The
socio-technical character of contradictions is thereby intensified and opens
up new dimensions of contradiction management.

Today, managers face similar challenges when it comes to placing
decision-making processes on a systematic basis, aligning the processes under
control with long term goals, and also achieving the targeted goal corridors.
It turns out that many engineering experiences on structured procedures in
contradictory requirement situations can be transferred to this area, which
has been investigated within the topic "TRIZ and Business" for 20 years.

Nevertheless, experiences and approaches to theories of structured management
are based more broadly and also have much longer historical traditions. __In
the seminar__, we want to study this field more closely, with special
attention to cooperative approaches in interdisciplinary contexts.

The seminar is a __research seminar__ in which we will jointly study different
aspects and management approaches and relate them to each other and to TRIZ
approaches to contradictory requirement situations.

Students are expected to actively participate in the seminar through
discussions, presentations and last but not least by reading the relevant
materials.  For the successful completion of the seminar, a topic has to be
prepared as a discussion leader and a 2-3 page handout has to be submitted in
advance.

Further details on the concept and procedure can be found in the [handout
"Seminar Concept"](../Seminarconcept.pdf) as well as in the ["Seminar
plan"](../Seminarplan.md) in the github Repo
["Seminar-S21"](https://github.com/wumm-project/Seminar-S21).

### The Concept of the Course

In this course, the focus is on the prerequisites and conditions associated
with sharpening the meaning of terms in concrete contexts.  [Technical issues
of the Semantic Web](https://www.semantic-web-grundlagen.de/) will be
addressed only marginally, as we assume that sufficient materials exist on the
web to learn more about such concepts to the extent required for practical
purposes, especially in the context of the seminar papers to be written. If
necessary, individual additional dates will be offered in which specific
aspects of greater interest will be discussed.

The course is designed at an __interdisciplinary academic level__. 

__Interdisciplinary__ means that colleagues from different areas are involved
&ndash; Sabine Lautenschläger (IIRM), Ken Pierre Kleemann (philosophy), Ralf
Laue and Hans-Gert Gräbe (computer science) &ndash; and we expect additional
partners from practice.

__Academic__ means that we want to work with each other and with you &ndash;
especially in the seminar &ndash; at equal level. It is about rational
argumentation on a scientific level, i.e. we count for _arguments_ and not
apodictic truths.

We are aware that this is a __high demand__ especially on preparation for
these events in your self-study, but we assume that these but we assume that
these efforts will pay off.
